# Using Git for Version Control

Version control software allows us to take snapshots of a project whenever it is in a working state. This way, if we make a change that breaks the project, we can easily revert to a previous version. 

Git is a popular version control system that is widely used in software development.

## Installing Git

Git can be installed from the official website: https://git-scm.com/downloads if it is not already installed on your system.

We can check if Git is installed and see its version by running:

```bash
git --version
```

If not installed, we can install Git with the command:

```bash
# For Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install git

# For macOS using Homebrew
brew install git
```

### Configuring Git

Before using Git, we need to set up our user name and email address, which will be associated with our commits:

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your.email@example.com"
```

It is also best to set the default name for the main branch in each project. A good name for this branch is `main`:

```bash
git config --global init.defaultBranch main
```

## Making a Project

To start using Git, we can initialize a new repository in our project folder:

```bash
cd your-project-folder
git init
```

This will create a new `.git` directory in our project folder, which will track all changes to our files.

### Ignoring Files

Files with the extension `.pyc` are automatically generated by Python and should not be tracked by Git. To ignore these files, we can create a `.gitignore` file in the root of our project and add the following line:

```
*.pyc
```

This will tell Git to ignore all files with the `.pyc` extension. We can also add other files or directories to the `.gitignore` file as needed.

## Initializing a Repository

Now that we have our project set up, we can add our files to the staging area and commit them to the repository:

```bash
git init
```

The above command initializes a new Git repository in the current directory. After initializing, we can first check the status of our repository to see which files are untracked:

```bash
git status
```

In Git, a `branch` is a version of the project we are working on; here we will be working on the `main` branch. Each time we check our project's status, it should show that we are on the `main` branch. A `commit` is a snapshot of our project at a specific point in time. Each commit has a unique identifier and a message describing the changes made. Git would show us the files that are untracked, which means they are not yet being tracked by Git. To start tracking these files, we need to add them to the staging area.

To add all files to the staging area, we can use:

```bash
git add .
```

If we run `git status` again, we will see that all files are now staged and ready to be committed.

This command stages all changes in the current directory and its subdirectories. After staging, we can commit our changes with a descriptive message:

```bash
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```

This command creates a new commit with the message "Initial commit". Now we have a snapshot of our project at this point in time. We can continue making changes to our files, and each time we want to save a snapshot of our project, we can stage the changes and commit them with a descriptive message.

## Checking the Log

Git keeps a log of all commits made to the project. We can view this log with the following command:

```bash
git log
```

This command will show us a list of all commits, along with their unique identifiers, author information, and commit messages. We can use this log to track the history of our project and see how it has evolved over time. 

An example would look like this:

```
commit eeb7b2a00dfbab0e45ad2f8bf6f785dc5e215ac4
Author: pius <mutumakimathi5@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Mar 5 08:51:03 2026 +0300

    Enhance SQL notes with improved code formatting

```

